A CHINESE court sentenced disgraced former leader Bo Xilai to life imprisonment on Sunday morning on multiple convictions for embezzlement, bribery and abuse of power. The verdict and sentence were announced by the Jinan Intermediate People’s Court, which last month conducted Mr Bo’s five-day trial.

It was a sensational trial that capped one of the most sensational political dramas in modern Chinese history. Mr Bo, the “princeling” son of one of Communist China’s founding revolutionary leaders, held numerous high posts and appeared on track to rise even further. But all that began to unravel when his wife, Gu Kailai, was implicated in the 2011 murder of a British businessman in China and then, months later, when one of Mr Bo's top lieutenants made his way to an American consulate in an apparent effort to seek asylum.

In announcing the verdict the presiding judge, Wang Xuguang, dismissed the arguments Mr Bo had made in his defence, which included colourful condemnations of the testimony of Ms Gu and Mr Wang, as “ridiculous” and “full of lies”.

In addition to the sentence of life imprisonment, the ruling called for seizure of all his assets and a lifelong revocation of his political rights. Mr Bo did dodge the death penalty, which had seemed a remote possibility, but many analysts expected a shorter sentence than the one he got.

The expectations for a relatively lenient sentence were not groundless. Mr Bo is sure to have in his possession information that could be damaging to China’s top leader, Xi Jinping, and the rest of his new government. It seems even now that he might be able to threaten to disclose it, through relatives or other associates who live abroad. 

Mr Bo also retains a strong following for his left-leaning, Maoist-nostaglic political outlook. This, together, with his elite pedigree, might have been enough to protect him from such a severe sentence. Perhaps it was Mr Bo’s decision to mount a feisty defence rather than go down quietly that led to this outcome.

Before the scandals emerged, Mr Bo was the party secretary of the province-level municipality of Chongqing and a Politburo member. Sunday’s verdict marked the latest and presumably final stage in his career’s dramatic downward spiral. He was dismissed as Chongqing party secretary in March 2012. One month later, he was suspended from his Central Committee and Politburo posts; in September 2012 he was expelled from the party. In October 2012 he was removed from his last remaining post, on the Standing Comittee of the National People’s Congress, and only after that was he prosecuted formally. 

But the verdict may not be the last stage of the drama. According to Chinese law, Mr Bo should be entitled to an appeal. In the days leading up to the verdict a report in Hong Kong’s South China Morning Post suggested he would indeed pursue that course. Prior to that, the Post had published excerpts of a purported letter from Mr Bo in which he said he would “wait quietly in the prison” until his name is one day cleared.

An appeal would not please party leaders, who have argued forcefully—though unconvincingly—that Mr Bo’s case is a simple matter of corruption, and that it “should not be interpreted as a political struggle”. There is little reason to doubt that a political struggle is precisely what the case is, and it may not be quite over yet. By law, Mr Bo would have ten days from the reading of the verdict to launch an appeal.