N THIS week’s print edition we review “The Tragedy of Liberation”, a new book by Frank Dikötter, a Dutch-born historian at the University of Hong Kong, about Mao’s murderous “land reform” in the early days of Communist rule. It is the latest of several works published outside China in recent years that, with the help of hitherto unexplored archives, reinforce anecdotal evidence of the horrors of Mao’s reign. They have been making the Communist Party uneasy. In January President Xi Jinping reminded officials of the words of Deng Xiaoping: repudiating Mao could lead to “great chaos under heaven” (here, in Chinese). 

Diehard Mao-lovers in China have been greatly cheered by the publication of a new book claiming that the most horrific episode of all, the great famine of the late 1950s and early 1960s, was not nearly as bad as believed. The book, called “Someone Will Always Tell the Truth: Concerning ‘the Death of Thirty Million by Starvation’”, is by Yang Songlin, a former deputy mayor of Yuzhou in the central province of Henan. Its publication date is October, but copies are already available at a large state-run bookshop in Beijing. It has been called the first book in China devoted to repudiating the commonly believed death toll, and it is likely to cause a stir. Its publisher, Nanhai Publishing Company, is controlled by the party’s publicity department in Hainan, an island province off southern China. 

Mr Dikötter, in his 2010 book “Mao’s Great Famine”, argued that 45m died, including those who were worked or beaten to death. Yang Jisheng, a Chinese journalist, put the figure at 36m in his 2008 work, “Tombstone”. Earlier Western estimates usually put the figure at between 20-30m. China has not declared an official death toll. But a Communist Party history published in 1991 said the population in 1960 dropped by 10m people. This figure was repeated in another authorised party-history book published three years ago. Higher figures have occasionally appeared in the Chinese media. In 2009 the Guangzhou Daily quoted a well-known agriculturalist as saying that 40m died of starvation (here, in Chinese). 

Mr Yang (the new book’s author, unrelated to the journalist) begs to differ. Even the party, he all but declares, has over-egged it. Between 1959 and 1961 the number of “abnormal deaths” was between 3.5-4m. (He summarises his case in the book’s preface, reproduced here, in Chinese, on a website run by ardent fans of Mao). 

Mr Yang’s calculations draw on the work of Sun Jingxian of Jiangsu Normal University who reckons the figure could be as low as 2.5m. This would still be around the upper range of estimates of the number that died in North Korea’s famine in the 1990s. But it is a mere fraction of Mr Dikötter’s estimate which is more than twice the number of Chinese civilians and soldiers killed during the war against Japan which began in 1937 (usually estimated by Chinese historians at around 20m). Mr Sun’s argument has long been in circulation (such as here in an article attributed to him, in Chinese, that was published on the blog of a leftist professor in Beijing in 2012). But in August another article by Mr Sun in the prestigious journal of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences (here, in Chinese) gave his controversial theory new prominence. As Global Voices, an online-media monitoring group, reports, some Chinese internet-users are fuming about what they see as a whitewash.

Mr Sun says that population figures published by the National Bureau of Statistics for the years in question are unreliable. Large-scale migration from the countryside into cities in the 1950s resulted, he believes, in the double-counting of many millions of people who retained their household registration in their villages even after they had registered as city residents. (Population figures for those years were based on numbers registered, rather than an actual head count.) A large flow back into the countryside in the early 1960s, and a tightening of the household-registration procedures, helped to correct this. Mr Sun says this explains what seemed to be the 10m drop in the population. 

This is more than a purely academic debate. It reflects an acrimonious divide between China’s ultra-Maoists (a small but vocal group that enjoys some sympathy among the urban downtrodden) and liberals who believe that China can only progress politically by thoroughly repudiating Mao. Mr Sun does not pull his punches. He calls the figure of 30m-plus famine-related deaths a “rumour”, and accuses Mr Yang, the author of “Tombstone” of making “absurd” assertions about local conditions during the famine. “In fact, you just have to do a bit of research into the documents, or just use your brain to do a bit of thinking, to understand that such ‘famine-deaths data’ are preposterous,” he writes. 

Mr Yang, the author of the new 475-page book that draws on Mr Sun’s research, goes further. In his preface he discusses the collapse of the Soviet Union. One reason for it, he says, was Soviet leaders’ reevaluation of Stalin’s record and the acceptance by many Russians that he had persecuted millions of people.  Those figures were later shown to be exaggerated, says Mr Yang, but “too late”. He, like Mr Sun, refers to the famine as the “three years of difficulty”, a time-honoured party euphemism aimed at deflecting criticism of Mao for having created the famine with his disastrous “great leap forward”. 

President Xi appears to agree that raking up the coals of history could prove dangerous. The authorities, knowing that many Chinese are still fond of the late chairman (or at least get a thrill from seeing his waxen corpse), announced that his mausoleum on Tiananmen Square would be open on September 9th, the 37th anniversary of his death (it is normally closed on Mondays) and that, in keeping with normal practice, visiting hours would be longer than usual.